---
course_id: res-18-008-calculus-revisited-complex-variables-differential-equations-and-linear-algebra-fall-2011
is_media_gallery: true
layout: course_section
menu:
  leftnav:
    identifier: 6731877a92027d92b4abde60926c637c
    name: 'Part I: Complex Variables'
    weight: 10
title: 'Part I: Complex Variables'
type: course
uid: 6731877a92027d92b4abde60926c637c

---

There is nothing especially real about the "real numbers." More specifically, the real numbers are simply numbers whose squares are non-negative. The name _real number_ probably comes from the fact that there is a 1-to-1 correspondence between the real numbers and points on the x-axis. However the points on the x-axis make up a rather small portion of the points in the entire xy-plane. In that context, the complex numbers extend the number system from representing points on the x-axis into a larger system that represents points in the entire xy-plane. In this part of the course we discuss the arithmetic of complex numbers and why they are so important.{{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-1-the-complex-numbers" section="Part I: Complex Variables" title="Lecture 1: The Complex Numbers" description="Track Description: Herb Gross explains the need to define complex numbers. He defines the structure of the system of complex numbers including addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, powers and roots and shows that the system is closed under all these operations. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/BOx8LRyr8mU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-2-functions-of-a-complex-variable" section="Part I: Complex Variables" title="Lecture 2: Functions of a Complex Variable" description="Track Description: Herb Gross discusses functions of a complex variable, limits, derivatives and the Cauchy-Riemann conditions. Functions of a complex variable that are differentiable everywhere are called analytic functions. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/rVvGqWyQB_0/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-3-conformal-mappings" section="Part I: Complex Variables" title="Lecture 3: Conformal Mappings" description="Track Description: Herb Gross defines and explains what is meant by a conformal mapping. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/s1DFa1dCss0/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-4-sequences-and-series" section="Part I: Complex Variables" title="Lecture 4: Sequences and Series" description="Track Description: Herb Gross defines complex valued functions by means of power series expansions. He shows us how the amazing identity of DeMoivre is derived. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/UGiED1HPB08/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/sections/part-i/lecture-5-integrating-complex-functions" section="Part I: Complex Variables" title="Lecture 5: Integrating Complex Functions" description="Track Description: Herb Gross generalizes the definition of the integral of a real-valued function of a real variable to the integral of a complex-valued function of a complex variable and examines the ramifications of this generalization. Instructor/speaker: Prof. Herbert Gross" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/gpZu5N1FFq0/default.jpg" >}}